---
layout: post
title: First Visit to 3d Maker Zone
date: '2025-01-16'
type: posts
tags:
- 3d
---

A friend who works on a few projects with the team at the [3D Maker Zone in
Haarlem](https://3dmz.nl/) suggested I visit them, and I finally went there
today.

<!--more-->

In the past I have worked with laser-cut bamboo and other materials to construct
cases and other hardware for various projects. Lately I've been transitioning to
learning more about 3D scanning and printing, and a friend offered to arrange a
visit to the [3D Maker Zone](https://3dmz.nl/), a professional fabrication lab
and learning centre in Haarlem.

I was able to get a tour from Peter Van Den Bosch and talk to some of the staff
there, and saw a lot of new techniques and materials in their projects. For
starters, they are working with an incredible range of materials:

1. Plastic recycled from industries like fishing and medicine.
2. More sustainable materials like plastic impregnated with elephant grass.
3. Large-format projects made from MDF created from existing nearby wood waste.
4. Sandstone and Marble printing using dust leftover from industry.
5. Concrete structures created using a 3D printer.

I also saw a range of large-scale fabrication equipment. If you're used to
desktop or workshop 3D printers, the scale is just incredible, everything from
full-size furniture up to houses. Among many other things, they're using
software from [Adaxis](https://adaxis.eu/) to program industrial robot arms like
this one to act as large-format 3D printers:

![Robot Arm acting as 3D printer](/assets/img/2025-01-17-robot-arm-printer.jpg)

## So What are They Doing with All This?

I only saw a handful of the projects they're working on, but what I saw was
hugely impressive. First, I visited the showroom for [More Than
Layers](https://morethanlayers.com/), who manufacture furniture using 3D
printing.

The site also has an impressive large-scale structure assembled from machine-cut
pieces of MDF. Check out this full sized ["Haiti House" designed by Pieter
Stoutjesdijk](https://www.wired.com/2013/11/a-disaster-relief-shelter-built-by-the-new-industrial-revolution/):

!["Haiti House"](/assets/img/2025-01-17-haiti-huis.jpg)

If nothing else, I definitely picked up a few new joining techniques for the
next time I attempt a laser-cut project:

![Sample joints used in the "Haiti House"](/assets/img/2025-01-17-haiti-huis-joints.jpg)

They also showed me some of their efforts to scan and reconstruct historical
sculptures, taking broken or damaged sculptures and printing reconstructed
replacements for all or part of the sculpture. In one project, they [created a
replacement hand for a damaged sculpture in the
Wereldmuseum](https://bouwlab.com/digitaal-geproduceerde-prothese/) (formerly
the Tropenmuseum), you can see a copy here:

![3D printed stone sculptures](/assets/img/2025-01-17-printed-sculpture.jpg)

This was hugely encouraging to see, as in part I was there in part to talk to
them about preserving some of the works of [Hildo
Krop](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hildo_Krop), a prolific sculptor
commissioned by the city to create sculptures for many public works from the
mid-1920s on. At the moment I live in a building adorned with some of his
smaller sculptures, many of which have been damaged over time.

My hope is to put together a project to scan and reproduce less damaged
reproductions of the same sculptures from the same molds that adorn a
contemporary of our building located in Noord. Fingers crossed for more news on
that front down the road.

As if all that wasn't impressive enough, they have created an amazing space.
Check out their project to convert their ductwork into a model of an Apollo
rocket!

![Ductwork rocket.](/assets/img/2025-01-17-duct-rocket.jpg)

## Conclusion

My goal for this year is to meet more people and learn from them, and I'm
definitely off to a good start with this visit. I hope to get the chance to work
with them in the future, but if nothing else I certainly have a ton of new ideas
now.
