---
layout: post
title: '"The Mind of a Mnemonist" by A. R. Luria'
date: '2008-12-01T22:02:00.004+01:00'
author: Tony
tags:
- books
modified_time: '2008-12-01T23:05:10.803+01:00'
---

I finally got a chance to read "The Mind of a Mnemonist" in the midst of a
business trip. As with "The Man with a Shattered World", also a later work of
Luria, "The Mind of a Mnemonist" is a case study following one of Luria's
subjects over a large portion of his life. Where "The Man with a Shattered
World" detailed the life of a man with severe visual and memory defects, "The
Mind of a Mnemonist" details the life of a man whose prodigious visual memory
(and imagination) are both his greatest strength and weakness.

There are memory-improving techniques that urge students to train themselves to
construct mental landscapes, patterns of items connected to each other in space,
each of which connects with and leads to the remembrance of the next item. "S"
(the subject of this book) easily creates these types of mental landscapes, but
in greater detail and over a greater area than seems possible. He can walk
through and recall precise details in immense landscapes even decades later.

In his story "[Funes the
Memorious](http://evans-experientialism.freewebspace.com/borges.htm)", Borges prefaces his use of the word "memory" by saying that we
ordinary mortals hardly deserve to use the word compared to the subject of his
story. With apologies, "S" also lays claim to that word in a way very close to
that of Funes. In addition to memory, "S" owns the word "visualisation" in a
way that few of us will ever do. Three words into reading a novel, "S" has
already established the time of day, the architecture of the house, the clothing
of the characters, their appearance, all far out of proportion to what is
described. This owes in part to his synesthesia, which allows the sound of
words to spill over into additional sights, smells and sensations that colour
his perception.

What is remarkable about this story is that "S" is very nearly a prisoner of his
visualisations. As a child, he was late for school because he would either hold
the memory of the clock as it read at half seven (and thus think he had plenty
of time to prepare) until it was after nine, or because he would imagine his
doppelganger dressing and going to school, and did not realise that in reality
he had taken no action.

His life is a waking dream, filled with rich but nonsensical images. People's
faces seem incomprehensible, because he cannot recognise some kernel of their
appearance as being consistent between all the angles and lighting conditions
that are possible. When compared with utterly faithful imagined worlds and
utterly faithful (or perhaps perfectly well imagined) worlds of memory, the
present itself seems somehow dimmed to "S", like only one possible channel to
which the mind can be tuned.

When I finished this book, I was sitting in a pub I had visited perhaps a year
and a half earlier. Looking across at the sea on a dark winter's night, I was
able to recall (dimly) the view in summer, and each of the individuals who had
been with me the last time I was at the pub. It seems to me that my
recollections were based on a series of abstractions. The place itself was
recreated from multiple observations over a handful of visits that summer. The
people were recalled as they appeared when I saw them over the course of days or
even months, and generally in terms of key details (their faces, their hair, a
particular expression, a typical cut of shirt or trouser). This ability to
generalise over varied experiences and to store only salient details is key to
functioning in daily life. 

We do not need to recall what our coworkers looked like on a particular day last
summer to interact with them today. We only need to be able to identify them
today based on the key details of their appearance. It is not necessary for our
daily lives to recall where we parked five days ago in precise detail. We only
need to remember where we parked today, and in fact are better served if little
trace of the previous location lingers in memory. So what can we learn from a
mnemonist, whose experience is structured so differently from our own?  Looking
beyond the limits of what we are likely to experience helps us question the role
of memory, nostalgia and fantasy in the life of a fully functioning adult.

This is a well-written and utterly engaging book, and a very quick read. Very
highly recommended.