---
layout: post
title: '"Anywhen" by James Blish'
date: '2010-07-18T06:11:00.000+02:00'
author: Tony
tags:
- books
modified_time: '2010-07-18T06:11:52.509+02:00'
---

I was very fortunate on my recent trip through San Fransisco to stumble on a
treasure trove of books by James Blish, whose ["Cities in
Flight"](/2008-04-19-review-cities-in-flight-by-james-blish) and ["After Such
Knowledge"](/2009-08-16-after-such-knowledge-by-james-blish) series I heartily
enjoyed. Over the next few months, I'll be reviewing the books I found in
between a few of the remaining books from the SF Masterworks series.

What I love about Blish is that his characters are driven by their morals and
philosophies. The critical turning point in his stories is far more likely to
be a change of heart or key realization than a deus ex machina or twist of fate.
His stories are a stage on which principles and ideas are given life and pitted
against one another. 

In "Anywhen", Blish wrestles with grand ideas such as attitudes towards death
("A Dusk of Idols"), whether deception in service of truth is permissable and
sustainable ("A Style in Treason"), and how our expansionist nature might be
tested when humanity finds its way to the stars ("Writing of the Rat" and "Some
Were Savages").

I've been thinking a lot about Blish in comparison with Olaf Stapledon.
Stapledon's focus in ["Last and First
Men"](/2010-06-03-last-and-first-men-by-olaf-stapledon) and ["Star
Maker"](/2010-01-30-star-maker-by-olaf-stapledon) is so broad that there is
barely room for recognizable human drama. Blish, on the other hand, is more
successful in presenting the higher concerns of individuals in the context of
their daily lives. The main character of his most famous series (["Cities in
Flight"](/2008-04-19-review-cities-in-flight-by-james-blish)) John Amalfi
reminds me of Gino Molinari from Philip K. Dick's "Now Wait for Last Year" (one
of my favorite books). Both are the types of great (but conflicted) men that
see humanity through times of testing. They make hard choices, and although
they bend their morals, ultimately they hold themselves to the ideals of their
conscience. 

"Anywhen" is short, but enjoyable, in that it gives us vignettes of a few of
these principled characters, and makes us care about their choices and
principles. Highly recommended. Stay tuned for a review of "VOR", also by
Blish.