---
layout: post
title: '"Tau Zero" by Poul Anderson'
date: '2010-06-18T09:00:00.055+02:00'
author: Tony
tags:
- books
modified_time: '2010-06-18T09:00:01.452+02:00'
---

I was pleased and surprised to encounter a copy of Poul Anderson's "Tau Zero" at
the American Book Center when stocking up on books for a recent trip. This is
one of a shrinking handful of books I still haven't read in the [Gollancz Sci-fi Masterworks
series](http://teknohippy.net/mw/), and I was happy to have found it.

"Tau Zero" is a novel about relativity, about a generation of astronauts who
travel close to the speed of light, reaching other worlds in a few years
subjective time (the rate at which people on the ship age), but several decades
objective time (the rate at which the Earth they leave behind ages). In "Tau
Zero", the idea of traveling close to the speed of light is the main character,
and it is explored to the fullest, and with the highest respect for the hard
science behind the concept. The technology behind their travel is roughly the
same kind of ramjet that the main character in  "World Out of Time" uses to
circle the universe at relativistic speeds and thus outlive the society that
imprisons him, but here it's not just a means to roll the clocks forward on
Earth and encounter a new world.

The 50 astronauts (and potential colonists) in the ship which is the focus of
the story must live together for years before reaching their goal and either
founding a colony or deciding to brave the trip back home. Many of them have
skills that are more useful when they arrive, and must find ways to occupy
themselves. Even those of the crew who are busy with its day-to-day maintenance
must find ways to keep their spirits up over the long haul even if the mission
goes exactly as planned. Of course the mission does not go as planned, and
Reynoud (arguably the main character) must play father to the crew and enforce
the basic routines that help keep everyone's sanity as things unravel further
and further. I won't spoil the ending except to say that it reminds me of the
ending of [Cities
in Flight](/2008-04-19-review-cities-in-flight-by-james-blish) in its scope, but is more hopeful and amazing.

I enjoyed the book as a whole. It's hard sci-fi (with real science rather than
science as magic) at its best, playing with the best science available at the
time to see how it might change the human condition. I also think the drama is
handled well enough. The only small thing that bugs me about "Tau Zero" are the
characters. As in his "HeeChee" saga, Anderson can't resist the urge to analyze
the characters, and adding that to the somewhat stiff way the characters tend to
express themselves, the novel on balance feels a bit more firmly an intellectual
novel than an emotional one. The same could be said of many science fiction
works, and this is definitely one of the better ones. Highly recommended.